Recently, I visited Valve to check out
their upcoming Steam machine, a gaming
PC that has the potential to massively
shake up the gaming console industry.
They were shockingly open about the
specs, features, and the design. But
there is one piece of the puzzle that
Valve is keeping close to their chest,
the price. And that's a pretty important
piece because when you look at the
discussion online, people love this
thing because they think it's going to
be a $500 console killer or they hate it
because they think it's going to be yet
another midspec pre-built gaming PC for
$1,000.
But which one is it? Valve won't tell us
yet for some good reasons that we'll get
to later. But what we do have is enough
information and enough lines to read
between that I believe we can make such
an accurate guess that if we're off by
more than $60, I will eat an entire
portal cake on the WAN show. What is a
portal cake?
>> You don't remember the cake is a lie?
>> An entire cake?
>> That's true this time.
>> Okay. Well, because I counted on you
guys to help with the work, you are
going to help me eat it.
>> Gladly. We win as a team and we die as a
team here. But I don't think that's
going to happen because our theory is
solid and it starts with the comparison
system behind me. This approximation
will both give us a sense for what a DIY
steam machine would cost today as well
as give us a sense of how it might
perform. Cuz Valve, they ain't no fools.
They care a lot about the perceived
value of the experience of using the
steam machine, not just the raw specs.
Let's start with their CPU then, or
rather not quite their CPU. See, the
Steam Machine uses a semicustom six core
chip from AMD. And while we would have
loved to use the near identical Ryzen 5
7540U,
we don't have a custom motherboard to
solder it to. So, we're going to be
stuck with the socketed desktop Ryzen
58400F.
To get our performance estimate a little
closer though, we're going to tweak its
power and clock frequency to be closer
to Valve's baby. About like so. Now, we
just need to save and quit.
It's not working. Oh, wait. I know what
the problem is. We didn't configure our
Segway to our sponsor, UG, Green. Their
beginner friendly NAS offers up to 120
TB of storage. It syncs smoothly with
Google Drive, offers high-speed 2.5 GB
transfers, and keeps your files safe
with local storage and built-in security
tools. Check out the UG Green DH4300
Plus NAS in the video description. Sure,
Black Friday, it's pretty cool, but
don't you think Thursday's even better?
I do, and that's why if you're an LTT
float plane subscriber, we're giving you
early access to all of our Black Friday
deals today. Like when you buy a
commuter backpack, we are throwing in a
free solid color mystery screwdriver. Or
when you buy a magnetic cable management
room solution, you can get a free Elgato
Stream Deck M2. And there is so much
more. And when you get there, you'll
notice there's a brand new float plane
exclusive collection. Did I mention that
you'll get free shipping on your entire
order on ltstore.com if it's over $100?
But hey, if you're not a float plane
subscriber, don't worry. We'll be back
tomorrow.
Uh, oh, I get it. We're putting the
black in Black Friday.
Now, we just put our equivalent CPU in
there and
immediately we're completely off the
rails with the ASRock B650M-H
M.2 Plus. a motherboard that other than
being a motherboard is as different as
possible from the one inside the Steam
machine. For starters, it's much larger
with robust power delivery and a
plethora of expansion ports and slots
that just aren't needed in the GameCube,
which other than a socketed SSD and
system memory, uses soldered components
to save on space, complexity, and cost.
Our board then is likely much more
expensive than the one that Valve is
using. However, the flip side is that
creating a custom motherboard that ain't
free and Valve is going to have to make
up those costs somewhere. Perhaps by
cheaping out on the RAM. Now, we don't
know for sure that Valve will select
generic Jex speed RAM like this 16 gig
kit from Crucial. But what we do know is
that they've chosen compact sodium
modules in order to save space, which
could cost them a little bit extra. We
also know that the 7540U is rated for a
maximum speed of 5600 megat transfers
per second. And unless Valve went more
custom than they let on, that's probably
about as fast as their semi-custom
silicon will go. But that raises a big
question. How custom did they go? What
does semicustom actually mean? As it
turns out, it means pretty much
offtheshelf, but with some tuning to the
firmware, power profile, and drivers.
And that choice tells us a fair bit
actually. Think back to the recent news
about Xbox reportedly cancelling their
handheld. Allegedly, that was at least
partially due to the fact that AMD
wouldn't commit to a custom SOC unless
Microsoft could guarantee at least 10
million units sold. So, what I'm hearing
is Valve is projecting enough sales to
bother doing this project at all and
probably enough for AMD to give them a
measurable price break, but not enough
to sell 10 million Steam machines.
Because if that were the case, they
might have chosen something more custom,
a strategy that clearly contributed to
the incredible price toerformance ratio
of their handheld console, the Steam
Deck. There's any number of different
ways to interpret this. I mean, Valve
has been burned on Steam machines
before. Are they just playing it safe
this time? Or do they just think the
market for a Steam living room console
that's also a computer is relatively
small? I mean, to you and me, 10 million
units is huge. I'd be stoked to sell 10
million units of anything. Like the new
transparent screwdriver from
ltdstore.com.
But when we compare that number to
console sales, yeah, it is tiny. Even
infamous failures like the PS Vita and
the Wii U sold significantly more than
that. So to me, this reinforces the few
hints that Valve has given with respect
to pricing. What it tells us is that
while Valve could look for every
possible lever to drive down price, they
just aren't that interested in betting
big on upending the console market. It
seems like they're more interested in
replicating the Steam Deck success by
giving gamers more ways to play Steam
games and putting a reference platform
out there for other hardware
manufacturers to chase and who knows,
maybe install Steam OS on. Ah, with that
in mind, then it's not in Valve's best
interest to monopolize the market. They
want to drive competition in it, which
unfortunately means they aren't likely
to slim down their margins and hit a
Christmas listable $500 mainstream
console price point. I actually asked
Valve about that point blank. And while
they didn't say no, they also didn't say
no,
which is kind of a downer. and we've yet
to complete our descent. As I install
our Kingston NV3 with 500 gigs of
storage, I can't help but be reminded of
the rising costs of both the NAND flash
storage chips that are at the heart of
every SSD and every type of memory right
now. Like both of them are more out of
control than a pre-teen on Mari Povit.
>> Catch me outside. And even though it's
not intuitive, this is mostly due to the
insatiable demands of AI factories and
hyperscalers who are sucking up all the
available production. And guess what? It
gets worse. While US tariffs seem to be
easing off a little, there is no denying
that global trade friction and
protectionism are hot trends right now.
And in just the few months between now
and broad availability of the steam
machine, any given part of it could
easily face cost increases due to these
factors. Rounding out our test bench,
we've got an AMD stock cooler since
we're going to be limiting our CPU to 30
W anyway. And powering it, this CIC
Focus GX 550. Not because the Steam
Machine will have a 550 W power supply,
but because where the heck am I supposed
to find a desktop power supply that is
both high quality and also 300 W. Now,
it's time to talk about what is arguably
the most important piece of any gaming
PC, the GPU. What we know is that the
Steam Machine will have a semi-custom
AMD RDNA3 GPU. We know it will consume
the lion share of the systems power. And
we know that it will come with 8 GB of
dedicated GDDR6 VRAMm. That actually
lines up pretty closely with another
product in AMD's lineup, the Radeon
RX7600M.
Sadly though, the M once again stands
for mobile. So, we couldn't find that
GPU in a form factor that we could plug
into a regular desktop. So, once again,
we need to look for the closest
equivalent. This could be a problem. The
most obvious choice would of course be
the full-sized RX7600, right? I mean,
it's got the same dang numbers in the
product name, so it must perform the
dang same then, right? Wrong. It is much
faster in most benchmarks. And if we
want a GPU with similar performance, we
end up with the RX6600,
but that is a full generation older,
which means that it might not have the
best support for AMD's latest features.
And depending on the games we run and
how much rayraced lighting they use, its
performance profile is not going to be
the same either. But what it does have
is the same CU count and very similar
boost clocks. And even the power rating
is very similar. So I guess we go with
this. Which brings us to pricing. David,
where are we at?
>> I would tell you that, but we're not
done yet. You fell victim to one of the
classic PC comparison blenders. Uh, you
don't have a controller, but the Steam
Machine will come with a pretty fancy
one.
>> Oh, I chose the Cyclone 2 from Gamester
as our standin. It's a high- quality
wireless controller with TMR sticks that
comes with its own charging dock. All
for 56 bucks. But, uh, the box is
missing its dongle. So, instead, we're
going with the winner of the ultimate
controller showdown from last year, the
Easy SMX20. You love this controller.
>> Okay, but that's still the same price
anyway.
>> It's close enough that our calculations
are still correct. Okay. So, what are
our calculations?
>> Well, if we were to build this machine
using the lowest historical pricing
>> Mhm.
>> from the cheapest sources,
>> which I would like to.
>> And let's say we add 50 bucks for a
case,
>> right?
>> We're looking at just over $600.
>> Oh, well, that's great news. I mean,
it's Steam OS, so there's no Windows
tax. So, $5.99.
>> I was not done. If we build it today in
the current market conditions from the
cheapest sources, we're looking at close
to $900.
>> Oh.
But we don't have to buy these exact
parts.
>> No. If we're deal hunters and we don't
mind giving up some of the bells and
whistles and some of the name brands, it
would save you about a hundred bucks
without giving up any performance.
>> Okay. But that's retail pricing that's
got some margin built into it. So, I
don't think I'd say $7.99 either. Or
maybe I would. Chatting with some
industry sources, it's estimated that
there's as little as 10% net profit in
PC parts, which would put our estimated
cost between $700 and $750.
With that said, Valve benefits from a
direct to consumer model, meaning that
they get to take both the brand and
retailer margins. And as we already
acknowledged, we did overspend on a
number of our components, including the
power supply, the motherboard, and the
case compared to what Valve would pay.
With that said, in today's market, I
still don't think they're going to get
costs under $600 to $650. Meaning that
the final question is, what kind of
markup will Valve target on the Steam
machine? Without being a fly on the wall
in their boardroom, it's
>> it's impossible to say for sure. All
that Valve would tell us is that they
want their hardware business to be
sustainable. But what does that mean?
I think it means $6.99 US. If there's no
major changes in the market, it's
probably above Valve's cost today and
there'll be some opportunity for them to
improve their margins over the several
year lifespan of their device as their
initial investment gets paid off and
hopefully RAM and SSD pricing returns to
some kind of normaly. And if we factor
in nice to haves like the dedicated
antenna for up to four wireless Steam
controllers, not to mention the
controller itself, the Steam Machine
presents a compelling value at that
price without completely undercutting
the market. And maybe this is the most
important factor. It's kind of a funny
number. I don't love this answer. And
I'm sure I'm not the only one who's
sitting here wishing that it was priced
like a game console. I mean, who
wouldn't want that affordable of a PC?
But you see what I did just there? I
just moved the goalpost. A big part of
the reason I want this thing to be
affordable so bad is because it is a PC
with all the benefits of a PC. Like no
cost online play for most games, the
ability to take advantage of Steam
sales, not to mention other gaming
marketplace sales, and maybe most
importantly, the ability to use it for
all kinds of non-gaming applications.
But it's exactly that PCness that makes
the console pricing model just not work
for Valve. It would take a matter of
minutes for me to grab my brand new
Steam machine, install Windows and Epic
Game Store on it and then never give a
penny of ongoing revenue to Valve. So,
coming back to that word sustainable, if
they want their hardware business to
make business sense, they can't risk
pricing this thing so attractively that
say a corporate office might buy 80,000
steam machines and kit out their entire
workforce, all of whom will buy a total
of
Goose Egg Games. Now, the Steam Deck was
never in any real danger of that
happening, which is why it could be
priced as aggressively as it was, but
the same can't be said for the Steam
Machine. So, with that in mind, what are
we getting for our $700 or at most $800
if the market goes completely
wackadoodle? Man, Steamos rocks.
>> I know, right?
Of course, that's not what we're
evaluating today. Nope. Today we're
looking at the performance. So, we'll
start up by firing up Hades 2.
>> You're only getting like 200 to 300
frames, Linus. That's kind of
embarrassing.
>> Okay. Well, we always knew that games
like this were going to play just fine
on this Steam machine. What we really
care about is how something more
challenging is going to run. And our
plan was to go with the game that seems
poised to win game of the year,
Expedition 33. But unfortunately, it's
running in the Steam Deck profile with
no way for us to reconfigure it on Steam
OS right now. So,
Cyberpunk, I guess
>> it's the crisis of the 2020s.
>> This looks pretty good.
>> Yeah, it looks pretty, but Cyberpunk at
4K medium details would look pretty. I
can tell you as the person holding the
controller, though,
45 fps is not great for driving it. Mhm.
But what's up with that? Valve said that
out of the gate, the Steam Machine
should be capable of running pretty much
any game on Steam at 4K with FSR about
60 FPS.
Well, that's where there's clearly some
tuning for them to do. Let's see if we
can get to 60. Why don't we start with a
low rather than a medium preset and then
let's change our FSR to performance,
which renders the game at an even lower
resolution before upscaling. Oh, hey,
that looks better.
>> That is above 60. Okay,
>> looks pretty good.
>> Yeah, it still looks dec.
>> There's a little bit of graininess.
>> I mean, there's always a little bit of
graininess in Cyberpunk.
>> Yeah, that's true.
>> You crank it, it's just kind of like a
gritty, grainy style.
>> Yeah, that was on purpose, right?
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
>> Night City.
>> This is very good. It's not the highest
I've ever seen Cyberpunk look, but if
you have complaints about this, you're
very picky.
>> But who's to say that gamers shouldn't
be discerning? While this looks fine in
a vacuum, it's only as good as how it
stacks up to the competition. How does
it look next to say a PlayStation 5?
What about second 4K display?
>> Normally, we'd have to have like
multiple circuits to run two PCs, but
the Steam Machine is going to be such a
low powered thing that we can have two
TVs, a PlayStation, and a computer all
in one.
>> That's actually a pretty good point. The
expectations for running something in
your living room are a little bit
different than, you know, a dedicated
battle station of a gaming PC. Being
power efficient is definitely a plus.
We're not in quite the same spot, but
this is enough to give us an idea of how
these systems will compare, both in
terms of performance and in terms of
image quality. It's funny. I think I'm
actually running a touch sharper than
you.
>> Way sharper. I think I have better
lighting. Details are better.
>> Is definitely better.
>> But I if I were to pick one, I actually
think I would pick that.
>> I was going to say I'd probably pick the
PlayStation.
>> Interesting.
>> You're in performance mode right now,
right? which means you're getting about
60 fps, which is about the same as what
I'm getting. Either way, though, there's
no clear winner. There's no obvious
winner, which tells us that as long as
they're reasonably within range of a
PlayStation 5 on price, they're
reasonably within range on performance
>> 100%.
>> Here, do you want to try? Yeah.
>> Well, just your inputs feel looser just
because of the VSSync. Also, that's a
better controller than this. I'm sorry.
The joysticks. Anyway, the joysticks,
the the triggers on the Dual Sense are
so cool. Yeah. Now that I'm on the
PlayStation 5, my level of detail at a
distance is ah man. No, I don't know.
Actually, LOD might be similar. It's the
lighting.
>> Yeah,
>> it's the lighting that makes a huge
difference on the PlayStation.
>> The nice thing about the Steam Deck is
because it's a PC, you can tweak it to
have the settings you want. So, I find
everyone's a little bit more sensitive
to different settings appearing in their
graphics. And so, having control over
that's really nice. Like, you might not
worry that much about jaggy. So, then
you can put that headroom somewhere
else. On PlayStation, it's either 60 or
30, maybe that's that's your choice.
>> Yeah. Like, if you sit farther from your
TV, you could run that at 1080p if you
really wanted to.
>> Totally. So bottom line, Valve clearly
has a couple of little details to polish
up, but they have a few months to do it.
And they've also made it very clear that
they feel there is more juice to be
squeezed from the hardware from a
performance standpoint as well with
their custom drivers for AMD Radeon
cards. Not to mention deep integration
with Steam OS, which we can't count on
until we get the real Steam machine in
our hands, not this Frankenstein's
monster. But even based on what we've
seen so far, at this performance level,
at this price, with this level of
flexibility, not to mention that it's
really small and damn near dead silent,
I think it looks like a pretty
compelling value. And according to
Valve, the market for this box might be
bigger than you would think. They
estimate that the Steam Machine will be
more powerful than what 70% of Steam
users currently have. That doesn't
necessarily translate to something that
70% of users would be interested in
purchasing, but it does mean that it's
almost certain that the Steam Machine
will find an audience. Even if it does
cost more than we estimate, I just hope
that it doesn't cost too much. Or if it
does cost too much, I hope it doesn't
succeed too much because I'd love for
Valve to just say, "Oh, we didn't sell
enough of these. You know what? Screw
it. Let's just upend the living room
console." Not to mention the entry-level
workstation space. Like look at the way
the Steam Deck seems to have lit a fire
under Nintendo's lethargic butt. I love
Valve as a disruptor. And I also love
our sponsor, Vessie. Their biggest sale
of the year is going on right now.
Whether it's a chilly, damp morning
commute or a holiday family gathering,
Vessie makes staying dry, warm, and
stylish a breeze. Now's the perfect time
to upgrade your wardrobe for the
chillier days ahead because Vessie is
offering 25% off sitewide with some
items getting discounts as high as 55%
off. They claim their shoes are 100%
waterproof thanks to the Dateex
technology, which is also a lightweight
and breathable material, so you can stay
comfortable throughout your day. Looking
for a great gift for that puddle
stomping loved one? Check out Vessie's
weekend lineup. Or make a splash at your
work's holiday party with some of their
other apparel, including beanies,
shirts, and jackets. As always, their
products come with a one-year warranty
and a 30-day worry-free return. Plus,
shipping is free in North America on all
orders over $110. Don't wait. Your
perfect pair is just a click away at
vessie.com. If you guys want more Steam
Machine content, get subscribed as we
have more on the way. But in the
meantime, you should check out either of
our recent Valve hardware coverage. Or
hey, maybe how about the time we deep
dived into the state of Steam OS on
nonValve hardware. Steam OS is likely to
end up far more important than the Steam
Deck and the Steam Machine combined.